To implement the Gibbs sampler
we have just described,
let's return to our running example
where the data, or the percent change,
in total personnel from last year
to this year for ten companies.
We're still going to use
the normal likelihood.
Up until now, we have fixed the variance,
the variance of the growth between
companies, sigma squared, at 1.
Now we're going to relax that assumption.
We will not assume we know sigma squared,
we're going to estimate it,
like we do for mu, the mean.
Instead of a t prior from earlier,
we're going to use the conditionally
conjugate priors, normal for the mean, mu,
and inverse gamma for
the variance, sigma squared.
The first step is going to be to
write functions in R that simulate
from the full conditional distributions
we derived in the previous segment.
Here's the full conditional update for
the mean mu,
and here is the full conditional update
for the variance, sigma squared.
We need to write functions
to simulate from these in R.
We'll call the first one update_mu, and
the second one we'll call update_sig2.
I've now written these two functions in R.
The first one, update_mu,
needs arguments n, ybar,
the value of the current sigma squared,
and then the prior hyperparameters for mu.
I first calculate this variance,
and then I calculate this mean,
which uses this variance in
the denominator, and, finally,
take a draw from a normal distribution
with the correct mean and variance.
In the update for
sigma squared, we need n,
the full data vector, all of the y values,
the current value of mu,
and the hyperparameters for
the prior on sigma squared.
In the first three lines, we performed the
calculations described by this formula.
And in the fourth line, we draw from
a gamma distribution, because R does
not create draws from the inverse gamma
distribution, we have to do it manually.
This is done by first drawing
from a gamma distribution and
then taking the reciprocal.
The output of this function will be
the reciprocal of the drawn gamma,
which will be a draw from
an inverse gamma distribution.
Now that we have functions that
draw from these full conditionals,
we're ready to write a function
that performs Gibbs sampling.
Let's call that function gibbs.
We'll take four arguments,
the data vector y,
the number of iterations
we want to sample for.
Initial values from the parameters, and a
list containing the prior hyperparameters.
We'll call that prior.
Since ybar and n get used frequently,
let's calculate those at
the beginning of the function.
This function is going
to output two variables,
a vector for the draws of mu,
let's call that mu_out.
It'll be a vector that has length n_iter.
And we'll also have sig2_out,
which will also be a vector
with n_iter entries.
The Gibbs sampler will update mu and
sigma squared by trading off,
sampling back and forth, given
the current value of the other parameter.
We need to initialize one of
the variables to get this started.
Let's start with mu.
That will be from the initial value of mu.
That comes from the argument
to the function.
Now we're ready to create
the Gibbs sampler.
This will be a loop.
Since we started with
the current draw from mu,
let's update sigma squared
first in this loop.
To update it, we need to take a draw
from the full conditional distribution.
That is, we need to evaluate this
function that we created here.
The arguments are the data length,
the date themselves,
the current value of mu, mu_now,
which we saved up here, and
then the hyperparameters.
These hyperparameters are saved
in our object called prior.
It's going to be a list.
So we're going to access
the nu_0 element or
object in the prior with the dollar sign,
prior$nu_0.
The same goes for
our other hyperparameter, beta_0,
which will also come from our list for
prior hyperparameters.
Now that we've updated sig2, we're
going to go back and update mu again.
Using the draw from the full
conditional that we wrote up here.
We'll use sig2_now, as the value for
sigma squared in this update.
And again the priorhyper parameters
will come from the prior list.
We're still in iteration i.
We've now updated both sigma squared and
mu, so let's save them,
sig2_out Where we fill
in the [i] iteration or
the [i] element of this vector,
it will be sig2_now.
The same goes for mu, the [i] iteration or
[i] element of mu, will get mu_now.
The loop will now go through
this sequence repeatedly,
where we take a draw for sigma squared.
Then given the value of sigma squared,
we take a draw for mu.
And then given the value of mu,
we take a draw for sigma squared.
We collect the results and
repeat this process for n iterations, and
finally we'll need to output our results.
We can combine two vectors into
a matrix using the cbind function in R.
We'll give it mu_out and call it mu.
And sigma squared will be our sig2_out.
Cbind refers to column bind, so
we're going to have a matrix of
two columns with n_iter rows.
This completes our gibbs function.
Let's read all of these
functions into our R session.
Now that we have functions
to perform Gibbs sampling,
we're ready to set up the problem.
I've begun a new script, where I've
collected the data, created a variable
ybar, which calculates the sample mean of
the data as well as n, the sample size.
The next step will be to create the prior.
The Gibbs sampling function
accepts the prior as a list, so
let's create it as a list.
Now to help us remember,
here is the model we're fitting.
The prior for
mu is normal with these hyperparameters.
And the prior for sigma squared is
inverse gamma with these hyperparameters.
Let's start with the prior for mu.
First, we need to give it mu_0,
the prior mean on mu.
Let's say this is 0.
We also need a variance for
this prior, sig2_0.
Which we can interpret as our prior
confidence in this initial prior mean.
We're going to set it to 1, so
that this prior is similar to the t prior
that we used in an earlier example.
We also need to create
the prior hyperparameters for
sigma squared, nu_0 and beta_0.
If we chose these
hyperperameters carefully,
they are interpretable as
a prior guess for sigma squared,
as well as a prior effective
sample size to go with that guess.
The prior effective sample size.
Which we'll call n_0,
is two times this nu_0 parameter.
So in other words, the nu parameter
will be the prior sample size
Divided by 2.
We're also going to create
an initial guess for sigma squared,
let's call it s2_0.
The relationship between beta_0 and
these two numbers is the following.
It is the prior sample size
times the prior guess.
Divided by 2.
This particular parameterization
of the inverse gamma
distribution is called the scaled
inverse chi square distribution,
where the two parameters are n_0 and s2_0.
We are now free to enter our
prior effective sample size,
let's say it's 2 in this case.
In other words,
there are ten data points and
there are two effective
data points in the prior.
And we'll say our prior guess for
sigma squared will be 1.
Once we specify these two numbers,
the parameters for
our inverse gamma distribution right
here are automatically determined.
Let's read these lines into our R session.
And before we run our Gibbs sampler, let's
take a look at the histogram of the data
with our prior for mu, like we did in
the earlier example with the t prior.
This should look familiar.
It's very similar to the t prior we
had before, but now this prior for
mu is a normal distribution centered at 0.
If you'll recall,
the data mean was about 1.
So we expect our posterior mean
to be somewhere between 0 and
1 Let's go ahead and
run this Gibbs sampler.
Before we start, we'll always set
the random number generator seed.
We'll use 53, And run that line.
And we need to create the variables that
we're going to pass to our Gibbs function.
Those are the init.
So we'll create the init as a list.
And init$mu, our initial value for mu,
let's just start it out at 0,
and run that line.
I think we have all of the arguments
ready for the Gibbs function now.
So we're going to call our Gibbs function.
I'm just going to copy and paste it so
we can remember the arguments.
So we'll call Gibbs, and for
the y, we'll give it the data y.
We have to select the number
of iterations, let's do 1,000,
like we've been doing before.
We'll give it the initial values
saved in our list called init.
And we'll give it the prior
hyperparameters saved in
our list called prior.
Now let's run our Gibbs sampler
by running the Gibbs function.
Press Cmd+Return.
That ran the sampler for 1,000 iterations,
except we forgot to save it in an object.
So let's run it again,
and save it as post.
We'll set the seed again, so
that we get the same answer.
And save the object as post, there we go.
Let's look at the head of post which will
show us the first several iterations of
this Gibbs sampler.
We run that line, we can see the first
iteration, this was the value of mu and
this was the value of sigma squared,
and so on down.
We can also look at the tail of post,
those were the last few iterations.
To analyze this posterior output,
let's use the coda package.
We need to load the coda library.
And we can plot the posterior
distributions as an mcmc object.
Let's run that line.
We're given a trace plot for mu,
a density estimate of the posterior
distribution that comes from our
Markov chain, a trace plot for
sigma squared and
a the density estimate for that posterior.
Additionally, let's look at a summary,
as.mcmc for our post.
We run that line, and
we get the summary for our Markov chain.
We can see here we had two parameters
that we were sampling in the chain mu,
which has a posterior mean about 0.90,
that's similar to our result from earlier,
and the posterior mean for
sigma squared is about 0.92 or
0.93 As we had for
the Metropolis Hastings example,
these chains appear to have converged.
In the next lesson we'll show you
how to make that determination.